---
layout: post
title: "On the Good Life"
date: 2017-07-01
excerpt: "Discussing the pursuit of of the Good Life"
tags: [philosophy, medium, Wolf]
comments: true
---

On the Good Life  
From our very first day we begin growing. In no time at all we are walking, observing the world, learning, etc. Not long after that we come to the realization that some things are good and some less than good, like candy...oh yeah it's good. From that point on begins the pursuit of goodness and in turn a good life. This pursuit evolves and complicates, eventually to the point where a question unfolds: wait, what is a good life? It can't just be candy because too much of that equals a stomachache and eventually some serious malnutrition problems. So candy is crossed of the list of possible answers to this Good Life. Where do we go from there? How can we turn these 80 odd years of life into something good, worthwhile, meaningful?  
In my opinion, this very important question can only be answered by a complicated and vague answer, which leads to more very important and difficult to answer questions. Virtue. I argue that the Good Life = the virtuous life. Now, this has a number of crucial implications on life and the nature of a healthy good one. First, this means that happiness is not necessarily a requirement. Second, mental intelligence (and indeed physical strength as well) might not be quite as important as we would think they are. Finally, the nature of a good life attracts the presence of conflict and personal challenge.  Let's start with this virtuous life. Why does that equal the Good Life? The virtues, of which there are many, bring a person into themselves and strengthens them. The natures of honesty, responsibility, discipline, temperance, perseverance, compassion, etc. bring a person to a better version of themselves, and encourage a person to reach their full potential. In Ancient Rome, the sort of chief virtue was known as "pietas." Pietas is sort of a combination of the modern understandings of duty, responsibility, and humility. You have a duty to yourself, your family and friends, your community, your state, and eventually to the divine. There is also an element of knowing your place in terms of capabilities. A person should not reach to take the place of the gods because he is man and the task would be too great. The conclusion of such attempts would end in tragedy for the perpetrator and those around them. Now, even with the passing of thousands of years, I would argue this still exists in the modified forms of our virtues today. You still have responsibilities and expectations to help out your community for the common good. Likewise, there are boundaries in place that should not be crossed. A dictator, a person who reaches for control of the lives of their people, is generally seen as a bad person. They are superseding their own capabilities and reaching for powers that they are unworthy of. Virtue becomes a search for balance of character, an attempt to finely tune the qualities of a person to reach full personal potential without going too far, so as to be untrue to the self. Being virtuous means being true to yourself, building character, and being a benefit to those nearby and therefore an encouragement for them to reach for their full potential as well.  
So what about happiness? Is the life of a virtuous person filled only with sorrow and suffering? I would say no. Virtue leads a person to do good things for those among them and that often causes happiness for a lot of people. However, it is important to note that in this example happiness is not the cause of a good life, merely an unnecessary byproduct of it. The simpler way to answer this question is to ask: is it possible for a sad person to live virtuously? I would say so. People who are sad or depressed can still do good in the world, they can still be virtuous, and they can still live a just, good, meaningful life, even if they can't see that themselves. Then ask the reverse question: is it possible for a happy person to live a wicked life (i.e. A life which is not virtuous?) Again, I would say so. Think of your misers. People who seem to be very happy with what they have and what they have accomplished although they haven't done much to help those around them or improve themselves. They may have the ability to do what they enjoy and live as they like and they may even see themselves as the happiest anywhere, but that doesn't mean they are living a good life. Happiness is great and it feels wonderful to be happy but is that really all there is to it? Should our chief ambition in life be to maximize happiness and minimize sadness? That sounds a lot like hedonism, and that's led a lot of people to unworthy deeds and eventually a lack of fulfillment. Sadness is a part of the human experience. While I'm not saying the way to a full life is through depression, in a life ignorant and unknowing of sadness can you ever possibly fully appreciate happiness? What would you have to compare it to?  
Now in a life striving for virtue what is the use of strength of the mind (of the body as well)? To this I would say these are useful but only as ways to travel along the path of virtue more expeditiously. In the terms of crafting, where strength of mind is the tool an artisan is working with, a great artisan can make exceptional beauty even with poor quality tools. In contrast, an unworthy artisan with top-quality tools may never create anything of true worthwhile beauty. The real deciding factor is the character of the artisan. Character gives a person direction on the path of virtue, while strength provides how quickly one travels on the path. I would say that direction is more important than magnitude. What use is magnitude if it drives you only in circles or worse the wrong direction? Let's use the test from earlier. Is it possible for a fool to live a virtuous life? Is it possible for an intelligent person to live a wicked life? On both accounts I would say so and history would provide examples. Hitler had a great mind for strategy; Jesse James was clever in a number of circumstances. Now look to the lives of those who may not be gifted with intelligence. The story of a little girl, still so unknowing of so many things, offering up her dinner to the homeless man outside a restaurant in Monterey, CA; the stories of individuals with severe mental disorders and IQs significantly below average assisting in soup kitchens or volunteering in their community to help others. Virtue does not require intelligence or athleticism, only character, and while strength of mind is a benefit and it should be greatly sought after, it's only truly useful if it's applied by a strong character. When a skilled artisan wields a quality tool, the greatness of the finished artifact is from the artisan's character and ability to handle a proper tool; the artisan creates beauty with their tool, but the reverse is not true.  
A life lived in this way invites challenge. Making yourself a better person, a stronger person, often means that tougher conflicts find their way to you. Thus a life of virtue creates a type of cycle, meeting a tough challenge, rising to a new level of personhood, then a newer tougher challenge; wash, rinse, repeat. This is not a bad thing, as this is the process for forging greatness within the person. It keeps things from getting boring and likewise easy. More likely than not easy and boring would make for a less interesting life anyway.  

The Good Life is far from easy, however no one ever said life was easy to begin with. It's a process of personal evolution but also fulfillment. This path is by no means simple, obvious, or definite. There are not trail markers at every point to tell you you're still on course or even going in the right direction. No, it's not usually easy. Sometimes it means accepting a difficult course. Sometimes you may not feel happy, and that's ok. Sometimes you may feel like you're stuck against a wall, like what you have just isn't enough. That's when you try the hardest. You do your best and rely on the character you built to find a way through. You're only on this world for a limited time, maybe less than you figure, maybe more, so it's important to do as much good as possible. You may not be physically immortal, but good deeds and virtues that are spread endure. They encourage others to do good and they create meanings. They help facilitate the making of a better world for others. If that's not a worthy life...what is?  
Wolf