---
layout: post
title: "The box"
date: 2017-09-29
excerpt: "Stepping out of our box can change everything"
tags: [Technique, short, VL]
comments: true
---

Routines are a system that can optimize our daily repetitive activities. For some, routines are very unstable and change every week or with every new project, while for others it has been the same for years. One could say that humanity often seeks to update their systems. Maybe it would be beneficial to update one's routines often too, yet trying to change one's behavior can be tough.  
	- *A good analogy is smartphone software: Smartphones are part of many people's routines and with an update that tweaks a single function or the position of a button can make the experience frustrating. The user was accostumed to the interface and didn't even need to think about the function or the button's placement, for example, and everything went well before. However, if the learning curve is short, the user will get over the initial difficulty and will enjoy the benefit of the new functionality.*  
Therefore, it seems that if the benefits outweigh the learning process, changing how one approaches daily life is worth it.  

Now, **how** can one change its routine? -*keep this thought in mind*  
The difficulty in changing a routine is not only in the frustration of the learning process, but also in the creation of an *effective change* of the routine; It is necessary to *desire change*, yet not sufficient.  

1. One must be aware of what can be improved in the routine.  
	- Systems can have strong and weak parts to it, and the individual must be able to recognize those aspects.
2. One must be able to **develop** a new process/action/method in the routine system.  
	- The individual needs to have the creativity to change parts of the routine, either by tweaking the current parts of it or by creating a completely novel process.
3. The new process must be able to be implemented into the routine.  
	- Therefore, it needs to be realistic; it needs to be able to work in the circumstances of life.  

In order to fulfill these requirement, one can use the method of **"Stepping Out of The Box"**.  
The method is the following:  
*The individual needs to, by luck or thought, realize that change needs to occur. In order cause such change, the individual needs to step out of the box. The box is the individual's routine, daily life or regular state of mind. In order to step out of the box, the individual needs to diverge from most of the things that are part of such daily life, which can be accomplished by going to an environment not commonly frequented or completely novel to the individual (there are other ways too). By stepping out of the box, the individual can now "look down" into the box, such as someone looking down at blueprints, yet these blueprints are of one's routine. Once the individual is in this* ***Third Person Perspective*** *of its own life, one can redraw the aspects of the routine; fix what is unnecessary, improve what can be more efficient, develop new ways. Once the new routine has been made, one needs to actively imagine whether the new routine will work in the setting of the daily life. This is a crucial and hard step that allows the individual to evaluate the new routine without compromising its life. Once the new routine is proven to be ready in the theoretical and imaginary settings, the individual can return to its box and place its new routine in it.*  
This method is simply an analogy of what humanity has developed throughout the times through retreat, meditation, pilgrimages, etc. With enough care, it can be a strong tool for improving ourselves so a person can keep *Aude esse Magni*.  
 
 -*VL*